\mainpage

# Introduction

Legofit is a computer package that uses counts of nucleotide site
patterns to estimate the history of population size, subdivision, and
gene flow. The package consists of the following programs

- @ref axt2raf "axt2raf" reads an axt file and writes a file in raf
  format. 

- @ref bepe "bepe" calculates the "bootstrap estimate of prediction
  error" (Efron and Tibshirani, 1993).

- @ref booma "booma" does bootstrap model averaging (Buckland et
  al. Biometrics, 53(2):603-618).

- @ref clic "clic" calculates the "composite likelihood information
  criterion" (Varin and Vidoni, 2005).

- @ref bootci "bootci.py" reads a flat file to generate bootstrap
  confidence intervals.

- @ref daf "daf" writes genetic data into the ".daf" format,
  which is used by @ref tabpat "tabpat".

- @ref diverg "diverg.py" compares two distributions of site
  pattern frequencies, using the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence.

- @ref flatfile "flatfile.py" reads a list of legofit output
  files and writes a flat file with a row for each legofit file and a
  column for each parameter.

- @ref flatpat "flatpat.py" reads a list of files containing site
  pattern frequencies. These may include the output of tabulation
  programs such as sitepat, scrmpat, and simpat, or the output of
  legofit or legosim. Writes a flat file with a column for each site
  pattern and a row for each input file.

- @ref joinraf "joinraf" joins several raf files line by line to make a
  new raf file.

- @ref legofit "legofit" estimates parameters from site pattern
  counts.

- @ref legosim "legosim" predicts site pattern counts from
  assumptions about population history.

- @ref legotree "legotree.py" makes a graph from a .lgo file.

- @ref mkfitted "mkfitted" reads a .lgo file and a .legofit
  file. Rewrites the .lgo file replacing values of free and
  constrained variables with the fitted values from the .legofit
  file.

- @ref ms2sim "ms2sim" reads the output of the ms coalescent
  simulator and rewrites it in "sim" format, which can be piped to
  @ref simpat "simpat" to tabulate site pattern frequencies.

- @ref pclgo "pclgo" reads legofit output files produced from
  simulation or bootstrap replicates and re-expresses free variables
  in terms of principal components.

- @ref raf "raf" writes genetic data into the ".raf" format,
  which is used by @ref sitepat "sitepat".

- @ref rafdaf "rafdaf" reads several ".raf" files and writes derived
  allele frequencies for each position in the genome.

- @ref resid "resid" prints site pattern frequencies or residuals,
  optionally deleting some population labels and/or mapping multiple 
  population labels into single labels.

- @ref scrmpat "scrmpat" tabulates site patterns from output generated
  by the [scrm][] coalescent simulator.

- @ref simpat "simpat" tabulates site patterns from the output of
  `ms2sim` or [msprime][].

- @ref sitepat "sitepat" reads ".raf" files for several
  populations, tabulates "nucleotide site patterns" (explained below),
  and generates moving-blocks bootstrap replicates.

- @ref tabpat "tabpat" reads ".daf" files for several
  populations, tabulates "nucleotide site patterns" (explained below),
  and generates moving-blocks bootstrap replicates.

# Nucleotide site patterns {#sitepattern}

These programs all operate on "nucleotide site patterns", which are
summary statistics not influenced by recent population size but rich
in information about ancestral populations. This section will define
site patterns and explain how legofit tabulates their counts, and
estimates expectations.

Consider a sample consisting of one haploid genome drawn from each of
3 populations, *X*, *Y*, and *Z*. Suppose that, at a given nucleotide
site, the derived allele is present in the genomes from *X* and *Y*
but not that from *Z*. If so, then this nucleotide position will be
said to exhibit the "*xy* site pattern." We ignore cases in which the
derived allele is present in none of the samples or in all of them.
By default (without the `-1` argument of @ref legosim "legosim" and @ref
legofit "legofit"), we also ignore "singleton site patterns"---those in
which the derived allele appears only once. In other words, we
consider only polymorphic, non-singleton site patterns. For the
special case of the 3-population sample just described, there are only
3 such site patterns: *xy*, *xz*, and *yz*.

In the general case, with samples from *K* populations, the number of
site patterns (including singletons) is \f$2^K - 2\f$. For example,
there are 14 site patterns in a sample involving \f$K=4\f$
populations. The table below shows data from a sample involving 4
populations, *X*, *Y*, *N*, and *D*.

    SitePat     E[count]
          x   528808.000
          y   518558.875
          n   529267.375
          d   581255.250
        x:y   320273.625
        x:n    43345.375
        x:d    41517.750
        y:n    49486.000
        y:d    40366.375
        n:d   255980.625
      x:y:n   108149.000
      x:y:d    91739.375
      x:n:d    89563.375
      y:n:d    91388.250

The `E[count]` column shows numbers that can be thought of loosely as
counts of site patterns in a genome-wide sample.

These number cannot really be counts, because they aren't
integers. This reflects the fact that our sample includes more than
one haploid genome from each population, and a given SNP may
contribute to several site patterns. The contribution to a given site
pattern is the probability that a sub-sample, consisting of one
haploid genome drawn at random from the larger sample of each
population, would exhibit this site pattern. For example, suppose we
have samples from three populations, *X*, *Y*, and *N*, and let
\f$p_{iX}\f$, \f$p_{iY}\f$, and \f$p_{iN}\f$ represent the frequencies
of the derived allele at SNP *i* in these three samples. Then site
pattern *xy* occurs at SNP *i* with probability \f$z_i =
p_{iX}p_{iY}(1-p_{iN})\f$ (Patterson et al 2010, Science,
328(5979):S129).  Aggregating over SNPs, \f$I_{xy} = \sum_i z_i\f$
summarizes the information in the data about this site pattern. These
are the numbers that appear in the 2nd column of the table above.

Tables such as the one above are generated by programs @ref tabpat
"tabpat", @ref sitepat "sitepat", @ref scrmpat "scrmpat", and @ref
simpat "simpat".

# Installation and testing {#installation}

The package is available at [github][]. Before compiling, you must
install two libraries: `pthreads` and [gsl][]. You will need not only
the libraries themselves but also several header files, such as
`pthread.h`. I didn't need to install `pthreads`, because it came
bundled with the Gnu C compiler. But the gsl was an extra. Under
ubuntu Linux, you can install it like this:

    sudo apt-get install libgsl0-dev

On the mac, using homebrew, the command is

    brew install gsl

By default, the executable files will be copied into a directory named
`bin` in your home directory. If you want them to go somewhere else,
edit the first non-comment line of src/Makefile.

Then

1. cd into the src directory.
2. Type "make".
3. Type "make install".

This will try to place the executables into directory "bin" in the
user's home directory. Make sure this directory appears in your
PATH, so that the shell can find it.

There is also a facility for installing a "global" version of the code
for other users. The first step (under unix-like operating systems) is
to set up a "soft link" to the directory just above the target bin
directory. Then type "sudo make ginstall". You'll need administrative
privileges. For example, to install the software in `/usr/local/bin`:

    cd                     # move into home directory
	ln -s /usr/local group # now "group" points to `/usr/local`

Then `cd` back into the `legofit` directory and type

    sudo make ginstall     # install into /usr/local/bin

This installation will work under unix-like operating systems, such as
linux and Apple's osx. I'm told that it also compiles under
Windows. If you use Windows, I suggest running Legofit under the
Windows Linux Subsystem.

The directory `test` contains a unit test for many of the .c files in
directory `src`. Within this directory, type

1. make xboot
2. ./xboot

to test the source file `boot.c`.  To run all unit tests, type
"make". This will take awhile, as some of the unit tests are slow.

# Sort order {#sortorder}

Several programs--`bepe`, `clic`, and `flatfile.py`--take lists of
files on the command line. These lists are most easily generated using
wildcard expansions, such as

    flatfile.py foo*.legofit

Here "foo*.legofit" will expand into a list of file names from the
current directory. It is important that these lists be in a consistent
order, so that `booma` can integrate multiple files created by `bepe`,
`clic`, and `flatfile.py`.

Unfortunately, the order of files in a wild-card expansion depends on
the locale settings of the local machine. If these differ, files
generated on one machine will not be compatible with those generated
on another. `booma` can check the consistency of files generated with
`bepe` and `clic`, but no automatic check is possible with files
generated by `flatfile.py`.

If you are using the bash shell, which is now available on Windows as
well as Linux and macOS, you can ensure a consistent order by
executing the following command:

    export LC_ALL=C

Do this before executing `bepe`, `clic`, or `flatfile.py`. Or put the
command into the `.profile` file (or equivalent) in your home
directory.

Under the C shell (`csh` or `tcsh`), the command would be:

    setenv LC_ALL C

# Genetic input data

Before doing data analysis with `legofit`, you must generate data
files in one of two formats: "daf" (for derived allele frequency), or
"raf" (for reference allele frequency). The first of these
alternatives requires input data in which the ancestral allele has
been previously called. The second ("raf") does not. Instead, the
program @ref sitepat "sitepat" uses an outgroup sequence to call
ancestral alleles on the fly.

## daf format {#daf}

This was the only input data format in early versions of the legofit
package. We began moving away from it when we realized that, under
certain circumstances, it can introduce bias. To understand why,
suppose we have data from 4 populations, A, B, C, and D. Suppose
further that D has received gene flow from an unobserved population,
which is distantly related to the 4 observed populations. This gene
flow will introduce derived alleles into D, but at these sites A, B,
and C will be fixed for the ancestral allele. If ancestral allele
calls are based only on A, B, and C, then no ancestral allele calls
will be available for sites at which derived alleles have been
introduced into D. The gene flow into D will therefore be
undetectable. To avoid such problems, it is best to call ancestral
alleles during the process of tabulating site patterns, using the
programs @ref raf "raf" and @ref sitepat "sitepat". Nonetheless, we
retain @ref daf "daf" and @ref tabpat "tabpat" for backwards
compatibility.

The suffix "daf" stands for "derived allele frequency". See the @ref
daf "daf" command for instructions on translating from "vcf" or "bcf"
format into "daf".

The "daf" file is simple and looks like this:

    #chr        pos aa da                  daf
       1     752566  g  a 0.835294117647058854
       1     754192  a  g 0.858823529411764652
       1     755225  t  g 0.000000000000000000
       1     755228  t  g 0.000000000000000000
       1     765437  g  a 0.000000000000000000

Columns are separated by one or more whitespace characters (tabs and
spaces). The first line (beginning with "#") is an optional comment,
which is used here to label the columns. The columns are as follows:

1. Character strings that label chromosomes or scaffolds.
2. Position of the SNP on the chromosome or scaffold, measured in base
   pairs. Daf format doesn't care whether nucleotide positions are
   numbered beginning with 0 or with 1, provided that they are consistent
   across files in a given analysis.
4. Ancestral allele.
5. Derived allele. Indels and loci with 3 or more alleles should be
   excluded.
6. Frequency of the derived allele within the sample.

The lines should be sorted lexically by chromosome. Within
chromosomes, they should be sorted in ascending numerical order of
column 2. There should be no duplicate (chromosome, position) pairs.

## raf format {#raf}

The suffix "raf" stands for "reference allele frequency". See the
@ref raf "raf" command for instructions on translating from "vcf" or
"bcf" format into "raf". See @ref axt2raf "axt2raf" for translating from
"axt" format into "raf".

The "raf" file is simple and looks like this:

    #chr  pos    ref  alt raf
    1     752566 g    .   0.835294117647058854
    1     754192 a    g   0.858823529411764652
    1     755225 t    a   0.000000000000000000
    1     755228 t    .   0.000000000000000000
    1     765437 g    .   0.000000000000000000

Columns are separated by single tab characters.  The first line
(beginning with "#") is an optional comment, which is used here to
label the columns. Lines whose first non-white character is "#" are
interpreted as comments and are ignored during input. They can occur
anywhere in the .raf file.

The columns of a .raf file are as follows:

1. Character strings that label chromosomes or scaffolds.
2. Position of the site on the chromosome or scaffold, measured in base
   pairs. Raf format doesn't care whether nucleotide positions are
   numbered beginning with 0 or with 1, provided that they are consistent
   across files in a given analysis.
4. Reference allele.
5. Alternate allele. Indels and loci with 3 or more alleles should be
   excluded.
6. Frequency of the reference allele within the sample.

The lines should be sorted lexically by chromosome. Within
chromosomes, they should be sorted in ascending numerical order of
column 2. There should be no duplicate (chromosome, position) pairs.

Raf files can be concatenated easily, by standard tools such as the
linux command `cat`.

# Describing population history in an lgo file {#lgo}

The ".lgo" format describes the history of population size,
subdivision, and gene flow. It also identifies the position within the
population network of each genetic sample. It is a plain-text file,
which should be constructed with a text editor.

In the paragraphs below, I will introduce a small .lgo file a few
lines at a time. The first line in my file is

    # Example .lgo file

This is a comment. Comments extend from the sharp character to the end
of the line. The next two lines define two convenience variables,
whose names are "zero" and "one"

    time fixed    zero=0
    twoN fixed     one=1

The first is a "time" variable, which I will use for the tips of
branches, where time equals 0. I declare it "fixed", which means that
it will not change. Variable names must begin with a
letter. Subsequent characters may be letters, digits, or underscores.
The second variable declaration begins with "twoN", which indicates
that this variable refers to haploid population size--twice twice the
size of the diploid population. When there is only one sample per
population, the sizes of tip populations don't matter, so I set them
all equal to "one". Next, three more time variables named "Txyn",
"Tn", and "Txy".

    time fixed    Tn=1897          # time of Neanderthal admixture
    time free     Txyn=25920       # archaic-modern separation time
    time free     Txy=3788         # Africa-Eurasia separation time

The comments hint at the meanings of these variables; the values are
in generations. The first of these variables is "fixed" (see
above). The other two are "free", which means that `legofit` will
estimate their values. Numerical values may optionally be written in
exponential notation. For example the last line above could have been
written as

    time free     Txy=3.788e3      # Africa-Eurasia separation time

Our measure of population size is twice the effective size of the
population, and we define two such variables:

    twoN free         twoNn=1e3            # archaic population size
    twoN constrained twoNxy=1e4 - 1.2*Txy  # early modern population size

The first of these is a free parameter, but the second is a new
category: "constrained". It defines "twoNxy" as a function of "Txy".
Constraints are useful when analysis of bootstrap samples indicates a
tight relationship between two or more free parameters. Constraints
reduce the number of free parameters and allow more accurate
estimates. In the constraint above, there are only two terms and one
independent variable---"Txy". It is legal, however, to use any number of
terms and independent variables. For example, we could have written

    twoN constrained twoNxy=1e4 - 1.2*Txy + 0.01*Txy*Txyn # OK

It is safest to put spaces around plus and minus signs. For example,
the following would fail:

    twoN constrained twoNxy=1e4 -1.2*Txy  # Fails

The parser interprets "-1.2" as a number, not as an operator (-)
followed by a number (1.2). Lacking an operator, the parser aborts. On
the other hand, this works fine:

    twoN constrained twoNxy=1e4 -Txy  # OK

Because "-Txy" cannot be interpreted as a literal number, legofit
treats it as an operator (-) followed by a variable name.

All types of parameter can be used in constraint
equation. Independent variables must be declared in the .lgo file
before they are used in a constraint equation. The parser can
recognize complex mathematical expressions and knows about the
standard mathematical functions. The y'th power of x can be written
either as "x^y" or as "pow(x,y)". The natural log can be written
either as "log" or as "ln". Parentheses are allowed, and operators
have the usual precedence. For example, the following lines are
equivalent:

    twoN constrained x=exp(a)*pow(b,y)
    twoN constrained x=e^a*b^y
    twoN constrained x=exp(a + y*log(b))

To spread a constraint across several lines, break the line after a
binary operator ("+", "-", "*", or "/"). For example,

    twoN constrained twoNxy=1e4 -
	  1.2*Txy +
	  0.01*Txy*Txyn # Constraint spread across 3 lines.

Although the constraint syntax is very flexible, we don't recommend
using all this flexibility. It's best to define constrained variables
as linear functions of principal components. The principal components
are then defined as free variables, and all other variables are either
fixed or are linear functions of principal components. The @ref pclgo
"pclgo" program can be used to rewrite a `.lgo` file in this fashion.

We have one more variable to declare:

    mixFrac free  mN=0.02           # Neanderthal admixture into y

The "mixFrac" command declares a "mixture fraction"---the fraction of a
some population that derives from introgression. As above, it could
have been fixed or constrained.

The next few lines of the input file declare the segments of the
population network. The first of these is

    segment x     t=zero   twoN=one    samples=1  # Africa

Here, "x" is the name of the segment, "zero" is the time at which it
ends, and "one" is the population size. Note that "zero" and "one" are
variables that we declared above. The "samples=1" phrase says that
there is a genetic sample from the end of this segment. In other
words, the date of the sample is "t=zero". If the segment has no
samples, you can omit "samples=0". It is also possible to specify more
than one sample, as in "samples=2". If you do this, the program will
generate more complex site patterns, whose frequencies will depend on
recent population size. In this situation, you would not want to set
"twoN=one".

The next two lines are similar, and define two other terminal
populations:

    segment y     t=zero   twoN=one    samples=1  # Eurasia
    segment n     t=Tn     twoN=twoNn  samples=1  # Neanderthal

Segment "n" does not end at time zero, but rather at the time, Tn, of
Neanderthal admixture. It has one sample, whose date is also Tn. This
is a bit of a stretch, because it assumes that the Neanderthal genome
lived at the same time as the episode of admixture. I make this
assumption for simplicity---this is only an example. There are 3 more
segments to declare:

    segment y2    t=Tn     twoN=one               # pre-mig eurasia
    segment xy    t=Txy    twoN=twoNxy            # early modern
    segment xyn   t=Txyn   twoN=twoNn             # ancestral

These segments don't have a "samples" component, because none of them
have genetic samples.  Segment y2 represents the Eurasian population
before the episode of admixture. Note that it ends at the same time as
segment n. This is necessary, because we will want to mix y2 and n
below to model gene flow. Also note that the size of xyn equals
twoNn---the same variable we used in setting the size of segment n. This
establishes a constraint: the sizes of XYN and N will always be equal,
no matter how the optimizer adjusts the value of twoNn.

The rest of the .lgo file defines relationships between segments. This
involves two statements: "mix" and "derive". Consider the mix
statement first:

    mix    y  from y2 + mN * n      # y is a mixture of y2 and n

This says that y is a mixture of y2 and n, which must end at the same
date. Specifically, a fraction mN of y comes from n and the remaining
fraction comes from y2. Finally, we have 4 examples of the "derive"
statement:

    derive x  from xy               # x is child of xy
    derive y2 from xy               # y2 is child of xy
    derive xy from xyn              # xy is child of xyn
    derive n  from xyn              # n is child of xyn

These statements establish ancestor-descendant relationships between
segments. Note that x and y2 both derive from xy, so xy has two
"children", but x and y2 each have only one parent. On the other hand,
segment y has two parents, as defined in the "mix" statement above.

Segments cannot have more than two parents or more than two
children. All segments should descend, eventually, from a single
root.

The site patterns printed refer only to the segments that contain
samples, and the sort order of site patterns is determined by the
order in which segments are listed in the .lgo file. In the file
discussed above, there are three segments with samples, and these are
in order "x", "y", "n". For this reason, the output will contain a
site pattern labeled "x:y:n" rather than, say, "x:n:y".

Using this .lgo file as input, `legosim -i 10000` produces

    ############################################################
    # legosim: generate site patterns by coalescent simulation #
    ############################################################

    # Program was compiled: Jun  8 2017 12:41:14
    # Program was run: Tue Jul 11 09:18:00 2017

    # cmd: legosim -i 10000 input.lgo
    # nreps                       : 10000
    # input file                  : input.lgo
    # not simulating mutations
    # excluding singleton site patterns.
    #       SitePat E[BranchLength]
                x:y   17493.5768947
                x:n       5.7110115
                y:n     467.3607849

The program reports the mean branch length in generations of three
site patterns. For example, "x:y" refers to the pattern in which the
derived allele is present in the samples x and y but not in n. The 2nd
column gives the expected length in generations of the branch on which
mutations would generate the corresponding site pattern.

In the example above, we saw parameters of three types: "twoN",
"time", and "mixFrac". There is also a 4th type of variable, which is
declared with the "param" command, and which is intended to represent
quantities that are neither times, population sizes, nor admixture
fractions. Here's an example, which also illustrates the how ranges
can be specified for free parameters.

    param free [ 0, 2] msum = 0.02  # mN + mD
    param free [-1, 1] mdif = 0.0   # mN - mD
    mixFrac constrained  mN = 0.5*(msum + mdif)
    mixFrac constrained  mD = 0.5*(msum - mdif)

Here `msum` is the sum of two admixture fractions and `mdif` is the
difference between them. We defined the parameters this way, because
`mN` and `mD` were tightly correlated, but `msum` and `mdif` were
nearly uncorrelated. This allowed the optimization algorithm to work
with the uncorrelated pair of parameters rather than the correlated
pair.

In the declaration of `msum`, "[0, 2]" specifies the range of this
parameter. Ranges are used in initializing the random swarm of points
used by the differential evolution algorithm. Initial points are
randomly distributed within the range. A range can be specified for
any free parameter, not just those defined with the `param`
command. If no range is provided, legofit uses default ranges that
differ, depending on the type of parameter. The default range is
[1, 1e7] for `twoN` parameters, [0, 1e7] for `time` parameters, [0, 1]
for `mixFrac` parameters, and [-`DBL_MAX`, `DBL_MAX`] for `param`
parameters.

# Model selection {#modsel}

In fitting models to data, it is important to avoid
"overfitting". Complex models generally fit the data set better than
simple ones do, but this improvement may be illusory. As models
increase in complexity, we are eventually fitting the noise in the
data rather than the signal. Consequently, the complex model may do a
poor job of predicting new observations, which were not used to fit
the model in the first place. Methods of model selection aim to
penalize overly-complex models, so that the preferred model is the one
that is best at predicting new observations.

The legofit package provides two methods of model selection:

- @ref bepe "bepe", implements the "bootstrap estimate of prediction
  accuracy" (Efron and Tibshirani, 1993, sec. 17.6).

- @ref clic "clic", implements the "composite likelihood information
  criterion" (Varin and Vidoni, 2005).

# Using the package

## Predicting site pattern counts from assumptions about history

For this purpose, you want to use the program @ref legosim "legosim". The
first step is create a file in @ref lgo ".lgo" format, which describes
the history of population size, subdivision, and gene flow. This
format is described above. Then, you can execute `legosim` by typing:

    legosim -i 10000 my_input_file.lgo

This uses the stochastic algorithm, which estimates site pattern
frequencies by computer simulation. Alternatively,

    legosim -d 0 my_input_file.lgo

would use the deterministic algorithm. See the @ref legosim "legosim"
documentation for details about this algorithm.

See the @ref legosim "legosim" documentation for details.

## Simulating site patterns

The package provides support for tabulating site patterns from several
coalescent simulators. To study the output of [ms][], pipe the results
through @ref ms2sim "ms2sim" and then @ref simpat "simpat". For
[scrm][], use the `-transpose-segsites` option, and pipe the output
through @ref scrmpat "scrmpat". The authors of [msprime][] recommend
running their software within a Python script. Within such a script,
it is easy to generate output in the form required by @ref simpat
"simpat".

For less sophisticated simulations, use the `-U` option of @ref
legosim "legosim". This assumes free recombination between nucleotide
sites and generates site pattern frequencies with unrealistically
narrow sampling distributions.

## Estimating parameters from genetic data

This involves several programs. The first step is to generate input
files in ".daf" or ".raf" format, as described above. You will need
one .daf or .raf file for each population. For .raf, you will in
addition need a .raf file for an outgroup population. See the
documentation of @ref daf "daf" and @ref raf "raf" for details.

The next task is to tabulate site pattern counts. For details, see
@ref tabpat "tabpat" or @ref sitepat "sitepat". Either of these
programs will generate a small text file, with one row for each site
pattern. If there are 4 populations in the analysis, there will be 10
site patterns.

You will also need a .lgo file, which describes the model of history
you wish to explore. It also specifies which parameters will be
estimated. Details are above.

Finally, @ref legofit "legofit" will estimate parameters. This program
may take several hours to run, depending on the size of the analysis
and on whether you are using the default stochastic algorithm or the
deterministic one, which is invoked by the command-line option `-d 0`.

To generate a bootstrap confidence interval, use the `--bootreps`
option of @ref tabpat "tabpat" or @ref sitepat "sitepat". This will
generate not only the primary output (written to standard output), but
also an additional output file for each bootstrap replicate. For
example, `--bootreps 50` would generate 51 output files: 1 for the
normal output, and 1 for each bootstrap replicate.

These files should each be analyzed with a separate run of
`legofit`. If you have access to a compute cluster, these jobs can be
run in parallel.

You might be tempted to parallelize these legofit jobs on a single
computer, using multiple threads of execution. Don't do it. A single
legofit job makes use of all available threads, so nothing is gained
by launching simultaneous legofit jobs on a single computer. Unless
you have access to a compute cluster, legofit jobs should be run
sequentially. As each job can take several hours, a full bootstrap may
take several days.

Having run `legofit` on the real data and all bootstrap replicates,
you can use @ref bootci "bootci.py" and @ref flatfile "flatfile.py" to
summarize the information in the resulting output files.

Finally, @ref diverg "diverg.py" can be used for comparing two sets of
site-pattern counts or frequencies. It uses the Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence to measure the discrepancy between the two
distributions. It provides not only the overall KL divergence but also
the contribution of each site pattern. Thus, it will tell you which
site patterns are responsible for a poor fit between observed and
expected site pattern frequencies.

A typical legofit analysis involves several stages:

1. Write a .lgo file describing the model of interest. Let us call
   this file a.lgo. The value of one time parameter must be specified
   as a fixed parameter in order to calibrate the molecular clock. If
   singletons are excluded (the default) two time parameters must be
   fixed in order to specify the length of an interval. It may be
   possible to fix some additional parameters, if their values do not
   affect site pattern frequencies. (More on this below.) But in
   general, you want most variables to be free in this initial model
   to avoid introducing bias. Run legofit on the real data and each
   bootstrap replicate, using the `--stateOut` option. I'll assume
   that the results are in files named a1.legofit (estimates from the
   real data), a1.state (`--stateOut` file for the real data),
   a1boot0.legofit (estimates from 0'th bootstrap replicate),
   a1boot0.state (`--stateOut` file for this replicate), and so
   on. The command for bootstrap replicate 2 might look like this:
<pre class="fragment">
legofit -1 --tol 3e-5 -S 5000@10000 -S 1000@100000 -S 1000@1000000 \
--stateOut a1boot2.state a.lgo boot2.opf > a1boot2.legofit
</pre>
for the stochastic algorithm, or like this:
<pre class="fragment">
legofit -1 -d 0 --tol 3e-6 -S 5000 \
--stateOut a1boot2.state a.lgo boot2.opf > a1boot2.legofit
</pre>
for the deterministic one.
Here `boot2.opf` is the data file for bootstrap replicate 2. This
   will generate two output files: a1boot2.legofit will contain the
   estimates from bootstrap replicate 2 in stage 1 of the
   analysis. a1boot2.state is the corresponding state file.

2. In a complex model, there may be multiple local optima. If so, the
   various .legofit files may be scattered among these optima. To
   address this problem, restart legofit for each data file, using the
   `--stateIn` option multiple times. For example:
<pre class="fragment">
legofit -1 --tol 2e-5 -S 1000@2000000 a.lgo boot2.opf \
  --stateIn a1.state \
  --stateIn a1boot0.state \
  --stateIn a1boot1.state \
  --stateIn a1boot2.state \
  ...
  --stateIn a1boot49.statep > a2boot2.legofit
</pre>
The `--stateIn` argument has been used here 51 times: once for
the real data and once for each of the 50 bootstrap replicates. This
re-starts the optimizer with an initial swarm of points that is spread
across all the local optima found during stage 1 of the
analysis. Legofit is then able to choose among local optima.

3. Use pclgo to re-express the free variables of a.lgo in terms of
   principal components. Optionally, you can use the `--tol` argument
   of pclgo to reduce the dimension of the parameter space. See the
   @ref pclgo "pclgo" page for instructions on using this program to
   construct a new file--let's call it b.lgo--in which all free
   variables are principal components. Repeat stages 1 and 2 for this
   new .lgo file.

I mentioned above that some variables do not affect site pattern
frequencies. As an example, consider the case in which there is a
single modern sample from population Y, a single ancient sample from
Z, and there is gene flow from Z into Y. If the gene flow is more
recent than the ancient sample, its timing will not affect site
pattern frequencies. The time of admixture should therefore be
declared as a fixed variable with an arbitrary value in the .lgo file.

## Sort order of site patterns

The sort order of site patterns is determined by the order of command
line arguments to @ref tabpat "tabpat" and @ref sitepat "sitepat", and
by the order in which segments are defined in the .lgo file. For
example, if "x" precedes "y", then we get a site pattern labeled "xy"
rather than "yx". These inputs should be ordered consistently in
tabpat, sitepat, and .lgo, for otherwise it will be hard to compare
observed site pattern frequencies with those predicted by @ref legosim
"legosim" or @ref legofit "legofit". I recommend arranging them in the
order that populations labels appear in your figures.

# Bias in legofit

## Biases arising from constraints

Biases arise in `legofit` because of the constraint that a child
population cannot be older than its parent. If the parent's age is
fixed, then it represents an inequality constraint on the age of the
child. If the child is only slightly younger than the parent, the
optimizer has problems. It will propose new values for the child's
age. Those that increase the child's age will be rejected if they
violate the inequality constraint. Those that decrease the child's age
do not encounter this constraint. Consequently, the optimizer is more
likely to move away from the constraint rather than toward it. This
biases estimates away from the constraint, whenever the true value is
close to the constraint.

The magnitude of this bias depends on the spread of the sampling
distribution of the child's age. If that sampling distribution is
wide, then the DE algorithm will tend to take large steps and will
encounter the boundary constraint sooner. This generates a large
bias. If the sampling distribution is narrow, the bias is small.

## Bias arising from selection of variant sites

Genetic data are often restricted to sites that are polymorphic within
some group of samples. For example, the 1000-Genomes Project
distributes files containing genotypes that are polymorphic within
modern humans. These data do not include sites at which the derived
allele is present only in Neanderthals and/or Denisovans. An analysis
using such data would be biased, because it would undercount the
corresponding site patterns.

To avoid this bias, it is best to work with complete genomes rather
than just the variant sites. Alternatively, one could call variant
sites jointly using all genomes to be included in the analysis.

## Bias arising from identifiability problems

It is often the case that many sets of parameter values imply the same
site pattern frequencies. Ideally this merely broadens confidence
intervals and does not introduce bias. It can, however, introduce
bias. For this reason, one should always check for bias after a model
has been fit. To check for bias, I use [msprime][] to simulate 50 data
sets, using the model of history implied by the fitted parameter
values. Then analyze these as though they were real data. If the
resulting estimates are scattered around the fitted parameter value,
then there is no substantial bias.

[ms]: http://home.uchicago.edu/rhudson1/source/mksamples.html

[scrm]: https://scrm.github.io

[msprime]: https://github.com/tskit-dev/msprime

[github]: https://github.com/alanrogers/legofit "GitHub"

[gsl]: http://www.gnu.org/software/gsl
